Manual Enumeration
Manually enumerating a system
can be time consuming.
It does, however, allow for more control
and can help identify certain
rare privilege escalation methods
that are often missed by automated tools.
To demonstrate all the commands,
we will SSH as a non-privileged
user to both our Debian
and Windows clients.
Enumerating Users
When gaining access to a target,
one of the first things we should identify
is the user we are running as.
The whoami command is
a good place to start
because it is available on
both Windows and Linux.
When run without arguments,
whoami will display
the username the shell
is running as.
On Windows, we can gather more information
by passing the discovered user name
as an argument to the net user command.
This output indicates various information
including the user we are running as
(student) and the groups we belong to.
On Linux-based systems,
we can use the id command
to gather information about
the current user:
The output reveals the we
are running as the student user,
which has a User Identifier
and Group Identifier of 1000.
To find other user accounts on a windows
system, we can run net user.
This reveals other accounts,
including the admin account.
To enumerate users on
a Linux-based system,
we can simply read the contents
of the /etc/passwd file.
The passwd file contains several
user accounts, including accounts
used by services on the target
machine such as www-data,
which suggests that a webserver
may be running on this machine.
Enumerating all users on a
target machine will help identify
high-privilege user accounts we
could target to elevate our privileges.
Enumerating the Hostname
The hostname of a machine can
often give clues about its role
because it often includes
abbreviations such as
web for a webserver or db
for a database server.
We can find the hostname
with the hostname command,
which is available on
both Windows and Linux.
Let’s first run it on Linux.
The hostname of the Linux
client provides us with information
about the OS it is running.
Next, let’s run it on Windows:
The Windows client has a
fairly generic hostname.
Identifying the role of a
machine is useful
for focusing our information
gathering efforts.
Enumerating the Operating
System Version and Architecture
At some point during the
privilege escalation process,
we may need to rely on
kernel exploits that exploit
vulnerabilities in the core
of a target’s operating system.
These types of exploits are built for a
very specific operating system and version
Since attacking a target with
the wrong kernel exploit
can cause a system crash,
we must identify detailed
information about the target.
On the Windows operating system,
we can use the systeminfo utility
to find the operating system
and architecture information.
We can also filter the output using
findstr along with a few useful flags.
Specifically, we can match patterns at
the beginning of a line with /B…
and specify the search strings with /C.
We’ll search for the name of
the operating system,
its version,
and its architecture.
This system is running Windows 10 Pro
version 10.0.16299 on an x86 architecture.
On Linux, the issue and release
files located in the /etc directory
contain similar information.
We can also issue the uname -a command,
to find the kernel version
and architecture.
Enumerating Running Processes and Services
Next, let’s take a look at running
processes and services.
If a process runs in the context
of a privileged account
and has insecure permissions or allows us
to interact with it in unintended ways,
we may be able to use it to
elevate our privileges.
We can list the running processes on
Windows with the tasklist command.
The /SVC flag will return processes that
are part of a specific Windows service.
The MySQL service is
running on the machine,
which may be useful under
the right conditions.
Keep in mind that this output does not
list processes run by privileged users.
On Linux we can list all system processes,
including those run by privileged users,
with the ps command.
We’ll specify the a and x
flags to list all processes
with or without a tty
and the u flag to list the processes
in a user-readable format.
Several processes are running as root
and should be researched further
for possible vulnerabilities.
Our ps command is also
listed in the output.
Enumerating Networking Information
The next step in our enumeration
of the target host
is to review its network configurations.
If the compromised target is
connected to multiple networks,
we could use it as a pivot.
We can also check if a running service is
only available on a loopback address,
rather than on a routable one.
Investigating a privileged program or
service listening on a loopback interface,
instead of a routable one, could
increase our attack surface
and probability of a privilege
escalation attack.
We can begin our investigation on the
Windows client with ipconfig,
using the /all flag to display the full
configuration of all adapters.
This machine does indeed have
multiple network interfaces.
Next, let’s take a closer look
at its routing tables.
To display the networking routing
tables we use the route command…
followed by the print argument.
Finally, we can use netstat to view the
active network connections,
The a flag displays all
active TCP connections,
the n flag displays the address
and port number in a numerical form,
and the o flag displays the owner
Process ID of each connection.
Not only did netstat provide us
with a list of all the listening
ports on the machine, it also
included information
about established connections.
Similar commands are available on Linux.
Depending on the version of Linux,
we can view the TCP/IP configuration
of every network adapter
with either ifconfig or ip.
Both commands accept the a
flag to display all information.
This Linux client is also connected
to more than one network.
We can display network routing
tables with either route or routel,
depending on Linux flavor and version.
Finally, we can display active network
connections and listening ports
with either netstat or ss, both of which
accept the same arguments.
For example, we can list
all connections with -a,
use -n to avoid hostname resolution,
and list the process name the
connection belongs to with -p.
We discover various listening
ports and active sessions,
including our own active SSH connection.
Enumerating Firewall Status and Rules
Generally speaking, a firewall’s
configuration details
are only of interest during the remote
exploitation phase of an assessment.
However, this information can be
useful during privilege escalation.
For example, if a network service
is blocked by the firewall
and not accessible remotely,
it is generally still accessible locally
via the loopback interface.
We can also gather information
about port filtering
to facilitate port
forwarding and tunneling
when it’s time to pivot to
the internal network.
On Windows, we can look at
the current firewall profile…
using the netsh command.
In this case, the current
firewall profile is active
so let’s have a closer look
at the firewall rules.
We can list firewall rules
with the netsh command,
specifying that we want to show all rules:
According to these two firewall rules,
the Microsoft Photos application
is allowed to establish connections to and
from any IP address using any protocol.
Keep in mind that not all
firewall rules are useful
but some configurations may help
us expand our attack surface.
Unfortunately, on Linux-based
systems, we must have root
privileges to list firewall
rules with iptables.
However, depending on how
the firewall is configured,
we may be able to glean information
about the rules as a standard user.
For example, we can search for files
created by the iptables-save command
which is used to dump the firewall
configuration to a user-specified file.
To find this type of file, we could
grep for iptables commands
in all files in /etc or other directories,
supplying the H flag to show the filename,
and the s flag to suppress errors.
If the file has insecure permissions
we could use the contents,
to infer the firewall configuration
rules running on the system.
Enumerating Scheduled Tasks
Attackers often target scheduled tasks
in privilege escalation attacks.
Systems that act as servers
often periodically execute
various automated, scheduled tasks.
The scheduling systems can sometimes
have confusing syntax which can
cause misconfigurations or leave, user-
created files with insecure permissions.
If this happens, we can modify
them and have the scheduling
system execute them with
higher level privileges.
We can create and view scheduled tasks
on Windows with the schtasks command.
The /query argument displays tasks,
and to list the output as a list,
we add the /FO LIST argument.
We can also use /v for verbose output.
This command generates a lot of
useful information such as the task,
the next time it is due to
run, the last time it ran,
and details about how often it will run.
The Linux-based job scheduler
is known as Cron.
Scheduled tasks are listed under
a set of directories under /etc,
organized based on the
frequency the task will run.
For example, tasks that will be run daily
can be found under /etc/cron.daily
and weekly tasks under /etc/cron.weekly
Listing the directory contents, we notice
several tasks scheduled to run daily.
System administrators
often also add their own
scheduled tasks in the /etc/crontab file.
These tasks should be inspected
carefully for insecure file permissions
as most jobs in this particular
file will run as root.
If the file has weak permissions,
we may be able to use it
to escalate our privileges.
Enumerating Installed
Applications and Patch Levels
At some point, we may need to use an
exploit to escalate our local privileges.
If so, we need to enumerate all the
installed application and their versions.
On Windows systems, we also need to
determine the OS patch level.
We can use this information to
search for a matching exploit.
Manually searching for this information
could be very time consuming.
Fortunately, we can use the very
powerful Windows-based utility,
wmic to automate this
process on Windows systems.
We can use wmic with the
product WMI class argument,
followed by get, to retrieve
specific property values.
We can then choose the properties we want
to view, such as name, version and vendor.
One important thing to keep in mind
is that the product WMI class
only lists applications that are
installed by the Windows Installer.
Similarly, wmic can also be
used to list system-wide updates
by using the Win32
QuickFixEngineering WMI class.
A combination of the HotFixID and
the InstalledOn information
can provide us with a precise
indication of the OS patch level.
Based on this ouput, this system
has not been updated recently,
which might make it
easier to exploit.
Linux-based systems use
various package managers.
For example, Debian-based
Linux distributions use dpkg
while Red Hat based systems use rpm.
To list applications installed
by dpkg, we can use dpkg -l.
This confirms what we saw
in the password file:
the Debian machine is running an
Apache2 web server.
Enumerating Readable/Writable
Files and Directories
As we previously mentioned, files
with insufficient access restrictions
can create a vulnerability that
can be used to elevate our privileges.
This can happen when scripts
or binary files can be modified,
which are then executed under
the context of a privileged account.
It might also be possible for unprivileged
users to read sensitive files
that may contain important information.
Since manually checking the
permissions of each file and directory
is not feasible, we need to automate
this vtask as much as possible.
There are a number of utilities
and tools that can automate
this task for us on a Windows platform.
AccessChk from SysInternals is
one of the most
well-known and often-used
tools for this purpose.
We will use it to find a file
with insecure file permissions
in the “Program Files” directory.
Specifically, we will check the Program
Files directory for any file or directory
that allows the Everyone
group write permissions.
We’ll use u to suppress errors, w to
search for write access permissions,
and s to perform a recursive search.
AccessChk successfully identified one
executable file that is world-writable.
If this file were to be executed by a
privileged user or a service account,
we could attempt to overwrite it
with a malicious file of our choice.
We can also use PowerShell to
find the same information.
This is useful in situations
where AccessChk is not available
and we may not be able to transfer and
execute files to the target system.
The PowerShell command itself may appear
complex, so let’s break it down:
The primary cmdlet we
are using is Get-Acl
to retrieve all the permissions
for a file or directory.
However, since Get-Acl
cannot be run recursively,
we also need to use the Get-ChildItem cmdlet
to first enumerate everything
under the “Program Files” directory.
This will effectively retrieve
the access permissions
of every object in the target directory.
The AccessToString property
with the -match flag
will narrow down the
results to the specific
access properties we are looking for.
In our case, we are searching
for any object that can be
modified by members
of the Everyone group.
In this case, the output is
identical to that of AccessChk.
On Linux operating systems,
we can use the find command
to identify files with
insecure permissions.
Let’s search for every directory
writable by the current user.
We will search the whole root
directory with forward slash…
and use the -writable argument to specify
the attribute we are looking for.
We also use -type d to locate directories,
and we will filter errors to make
the output easier to read:
Several directories seem
to be world-writable,
including the james bin directory.
This should be investigated further.
Enumerating Unmounted Disks
Usually, drives are automatically
mounted at boot time.
It can be easy to forget about
unmounted drives and the valuable
information they may contain, so
we should always look for them.
On Windows-based systems,
we can use mountvol
to list all drives that are currently
mounted as well as those
that are physically
connected but unmounted.
This system has two mount points that
map to the C: and D: drives respectively.
We also notice that we have a
volume that has no mount point.
This could be interesting and we might
want to take a closer look at it.
On Linux-based systems, we can
use the mount command
to list all mounted filesystems.
In addition, the /etc/fstab file
contains information about
all drives mounted at boot time.
The output reveals a swap partition and
the primary ext4 disk of this Linux system
We can also use lsblk to
view all available disks.
We notice the sda drive consists of three
different partitions, which are numbered.
In some situations, we might find
partitions that are not mounted.
Depending on the system configuration,
we might be able to mount those partitions
and search for interesting information
that could allow us to
escalate our privileges.
Enumerating Device Drivers
and Kernel Modules
We can also escalate our
privileges by exploiting
device drivers and kernel modules.
Since this technique relies on matching
vulnerabilities with the correct exploits,
we’ll need to enumerate all the
loaded drivers and kernel modules.
On Windows, we’ll use the driverquery
command to help gather this information.
To filter the output, we will run the
command inside a powershell session.
The /v argument will
produce verbose output
and /fo csv requests the
output in CSV format.
Next, we pipe the output to
the ConvertFrom-Csv cmdlet,
as well as Select-Object, which will allow
us to select specific object properties,
such as Display Name,
Start Mode and Path.
While this produced a
list of loaded drivers,
we must take another step to find
the version number of each one.
We’ll use the Get-WmiObject cmdlet
and the Win32_PnPSignedDriver
WMI instance
which provides digital
signature information.
By piping the output to Select-Object,
we can enumerate specific
properties like the DriverVersion.
We can also target drivers based on their
name by using Where-Object.
We now have a list of all the
loaded VMware device drivers
and their version numbers.
On Linux we can enumerate the
loaded kernel modules using lsmod.
Once we have the list of loaded modules
and want more information
about one, like libata,
we can use modinfo to find
out more about it.
Note that this tool requires
a full pathname to run.
After obtaining a list of drivers and
their versions on Windows or Linux,
we can look for exploits
targeting these drivers.
Enumerating Binaries That AutoElevate
There are a few specific
enumerations that could reveal
interesting OS-specific “shortcuts”
to privilege escalation.
First, on Windows systems,
we should check the status of the
AlwaysInstallElevated registry setting
using reg query.
If this key is enabled in
either HKEY_CURRENT_USER,
or HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE,
any user can run Windows Installer
packages with elevated privileges.
If this setting is enabled
(with a value set to 1),
we could craft an MSI file
to elevate our privileges.
On Linux-based systems
we can search for SUID files.
Normally, when running
an executable,
it inherits the permissions
of the user that runs it.
However, if the SUID
permissions are set,
the binary will run with the
permissions of the file owner.
This means that if a binary is owned
by root and has the SUID bit set,
any user will be able to execute
that binary with elevated privileges.
We can use the find command again, this
time to search for SUID-marked binaries.
Like before, we’ll start our search at
the root directory,
looking for files,
with the SUID bit set,
and we’ll discard all error messages.
The command found several SUID binaries.
The exploitation of SUID varies
based on several factors.
For example, if the copy command
had the SUID bit set,
we could copy and
overwrite sensitive files.